



Domain Name System Operations                                   J. Abley
Internet-Draft                                                Cloudflare
Updates: RFC1035 (if approved)                               W. Hardaker
Intended status: Standards Track                                 USC/ISI
Expires: 27 March 2027                                         W. Kumari
                                                            Google, Inc.
                                                       23 September 2026


              Signalling a Zone Cut to Nowhere in the DNS
              draft-ietf-dnsop-zone-cut-to-nowhere-latest

Abstract

   This document defines a standard mechanism to signal the existence of
   a DNS zone cut without specifying authoritative nameservers for the
   delegated child zone.  This "zone cut to nowhere" is particularly
   useful in split-horizon environments, allowing parent zones to
   explicitly signal that a child zone exists but is only resolvable
   within a private namespace.

About This Document

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   The latest revision of this draft can be found at https://ietf-wg-
   dnsop.github.io/draft-ietf-dnsop-zone-cut-to-nowhere/draft-ietf-
   dnsop-zone-cut-to-nowhere.html.  Status information for this document
   may be found at https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-ietf-dnsop-
   zone-cut-to-nowhere/.

   Discussion of this document takes place on the Domain Name System
   Operations Working Group mailing list (mailto:dnsop@ietf.org), which
   is archived at https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/browse/dnsop/.
   Subscribe at https://www.ietf.org/mailman/listinfo/dnsop/.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/ietf-wg-dnsop/draft-ietf-dnsop-zone-cut-to-
   nowhere.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 27 March 2027.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Conventions and Definitions
   3.  Publishing a Delegation to Nowhere
   4.  Interpreting a Referral to Nowhere
   5.  Applicability
   6.  Examples
     6.1.  Internal Namespace as a Subdomain of a Public Domain
     6.2.  General Purpose Top-Level Domain for Internal Namespaces
   7.  Updates to RFC 1035
   8.  Other Uses of the Empty Name in the DNS
   9.  Operational Considerations
   10. Security Considerations
   11. IANA Considerations
   12. References
     12.1.  Normative References
     12.2.  Informative References
   Appendix A.  Experiments
   Acknowledgments
   Authors' Addresses

1.  Introduction

   The DNS protocol, as originally specified in [RFC1034] and [RFC1035],
   describes a single, global, hierarchical namespace that is separated
   into zones.  The boundary between a parent zone and a child zone is
   indicated using a zone cut.  Zone cuts are specified using specific
   resource records which are published within the parent and child
   zones; the parent-side resource records are revealed during DNS
   resolution by way of referral responses from nameservers.

   Private DNS namespaces also exist, and are commonly used in
   enterprise and corporate environments, where a portion of the
   namespace is only accessible within the organization, using internal
   DNS infrastructure.  This is often referred to as "split" DNS.  A
   user of a private network might be able to resolve names using local
   DNS infrastructure that are not visible to other users of other
   networks.

   When a device or application uses the DNS protocol to resolve both
   internal names and external names published in the global DNS
   namespace, ambiguity can result.  For example, DNS responses from
   Internet-reachable nameservers might indicate that a particular name
   published in an internal namespace does not exist, while an internal
   nameserver might be configured to respond differently.  Since mobile
   devices can attach to different networks and can cache DNS responses
   obtained from different namespaces, this ambiguity can cause issues.
   A DNSSEC-aware resolver on a mobile device might cache a signed,
   negative response from an external nameserver for a particular name
   and might treat a subsequent, positive response from an internal
   nameserver for the same name as bogus, preventing the response from
   being used by an application.

   This document provides a means of explicitly signalling the existence
   of a zone cut in a namespace in circumstances where the child zone
   only exists in a different namespace from the parent.  We refer to
   this type of zone cut as a "zone cut to nowhere" and introduce the
   corresponding terms "delegation to nowhere" and "referral to nowhere"
   in Section 2.

2.  Conventions and Definitions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

   This document uses DNS terminology as described in [RFC9499].
   Familiarity with terms defined in that document is assumed.

   This document also uses the following new terms:

   1.  "Zone cut to nowhere" -- a zone cut where the parent zone and the
       child zone are provisioned in different namespaces.  A zone cut
       to nowhere is a signal provided by the administrator of a parent
       zone that a child zone exists, but is not able to be used in the
       DNS namespace of the parent.

   2.  "Delegation to nowhere" -- a delegation from a parent to a child
       across a zone cut to nowhere.

   3.  "Referral to nowhere", "Referral response to nowhere" -- a DNS
       response received from a nameserver that reveals the existence of
       a delegation to nowhere.

3.  Publishing a Delegation to Nowhere

   A zone cut to nowhere is implemented in a parent zone using a single
   NS resource record with an empty target (an empty NSDNAME, in the
   parlance of [RFC1035]).  A zone cut to nowhere between the parent
   zone EXAMPLE.ORG and the child zone DUCKLING.EXAMPLE.ORG with a TTL
   of 3600 seconds would be described in zone file syntax as follows:

           ; zone data published in an external nameserver

           $ORIGIN EXAMPLE.ORG.

           ; the zone DUCKLING.EXAMPLE.ORG exists, but in another
           ; namespace

           DUCKLING  3600  IN  NS  .

   A zone cut to nowhere may also be provisioned as a secure delegation.
   This allows a DNSSEC-aware consumer of a referral response to obtain
   and cache a DNSSEC trust anchor for the child zone, for use when it
   is able to receive a signed response from a nameserver that includes
   the child zone in its namespace.

           $ORIGIN EXAMPLE.ORG.

           ; the signed zone PUPPY.EXAMPLE.ORG exists,
           ; but in another namespace

           PUPPY  3600  IN  DS  [...]
                            NS  .

   An NS RRSet in a parent zone which includes multiple NS resource
   records is not a delegation to nowhere, even if one of the NS
   resource records within the RRSet has an empty target.

           KITTEN  3600  IN  NS  A.CAT-SERVERS.EXAMPLE.
                             NS  B.CAT-SERVERS.EXAMPLE.
                             NS  .                        ; unusual
                             NS  C.CAT-SERVERS.EXAMPLE.

   This NS RRSet does not encode a delegation to nowhere, since other NS
   resource records exist in addition to the record with the empty
   target (marked with a comment as "unusual").  This configuration may
   have some other meaning in a different context, however, and is
   specifically not addressed by this specification.

4.  Interpreting a Referral to Nowhere

   No special processing is necessary in order to interpret a referral
   response to nowhere.  Individual RRSets present in a referral
   response to nowhere can safely be interpreted and processed in an
   identical fashion to any other referral response where the
   authoritative servers for the child zone cannot themselves be
   resolved, and hence cannot be reached.

   {Editor's note (to be removed before publication): Please see
   [Hardaker2026], and the IEPG recording [IEPG-IETF125] for real-world
   testing of this behavior.}

5.  Applicability

   When a child zone is known to exist in another namespace, and when
   that other namespace is intended for use with the DNS, a delegation
   to nowhere MAY be provisioned in the parent zone to signal that the
   child zone exists in some other namespace.  In such circumstances the
   parent zone MAY be the root zone, or any other zone.

   A secure delegation to nowhere MAY be provisioned if the keys used
   for signing in the child zone are known to the administrator of the
   parent zone.  In the case where differently-signed (or unsigned)
   child zones are known to exist in different namespaces, a secure
   delegation SHOULD NOT be used.

   The use of a delegation to nowhere in this document is described for
   the IN class only.  Use of this mechanism in other classes is not
   addressed by this specification.

   Name resolution protocols other than the DNS are also used by some
   systems, for names that are syntactically equivalent to domain names
   in the DNS.  In some cases, names resolved by those non-DNS protocols
   are anchored in a specific domain that is consequently reserved for
   their use in the DNS, to avoid name collisions.  Examples of such
   reservations in the DNS are the LOCAL top-level domain reserved for
   use by Multicast DNS [RFC6762] and the ALT top-level domain reserved
   use in general for non-DNS resolution protocols [RFC9476].  Domains
   that are not intended for use with the DNS as their resolution
   protocol SHOULD NOT be provisioned in the DNS as delegations to
   nowhere, since there is no DNS namespace ambiguity that such a
   configuration could help with.

6.  Examples

6.1.  Internal Namespace as a Subdomain of a Public Domain

   A company uses names within the EXAMPLE.COM domain both for internal
   services it provides to its employees and for public services that
   are made available to the general public over the Internet.

   The company also provides certain services that are only available to
   users of devices attached to its internal network.  Those services
   are named within the subdomain CORP.EXAMPLE.COM.  The company does
   not wish those internal services to be visible to external users.

   We say that the EXAMPLE.COM zone exists in the global DNS namespace
   and that the CORP.EXAMPLE.COM zone exists only in a private DNS
   namespace.

   The company publishes a CORP.EXAMPLE.COM zone on DNS nameservers
   attached to its internal network.  The company configures the DNS
   resolvers used by devices attached to its internal network to be
   aware that the CORP.EXAMPLE.COM zone is served by those internal
   nameservers, such that queries sent from devices inside the company's
   network can resolve names in the CORP.EXAMPLE.COM domain.

         $ORIGIN CORP.EXAMPLE.COM.
         ; internal zone only served in our internal network

         @      3600  IN  SOA   [...]

         ; the internal zone CORP.EXAMPLE.COM is served by the internal
         ; nameservers NS1.CORP.EXAMPLE.COM and NS2.CORP.EXAMPLE.COM

                      NS    NS1
                      NS    NS2

         NS1          A     198.51.100.37
                      AAAA  2001:db8:2:1::2c

         NS2          A     203.0.113.56
         NS2          AAAA  2001:db8:2:3::2d

         ; the internal intranet web server is INTRANET.CORP.EXAMPLE.COM

         INTRANET     A     198.51.100.74
                      AAAA  2001:db8:2:1::f8

         ; the management address of an internal network device known
         ; as BACKBONE-SW.CORP.EXAMPLE.COM

         BACKBONE-SW  A     198.51.100.65

   The company publishes an EXAMPLE.COM zone on nameservers that are
   general reachable over the Internet -- that is, the nameservers are
   reachable and the COM zone returns referrals for the EXAMPLE.COM zone
   to those nameservers.  The EXAMPLE.COM zone includes names that the
   company wants clients to be able to resolve regardless of what
   network they are connected to.

          $ORIGIN EXAMPLE.COM.

          ; the public zone EXAMPLE.COM is published to the Internet

          @      3600  IN  SOA   [...]

          ; the public zone EXAMPLE.COM is served by the nameservers
          ; NS1.EXAMPLE.COM and NS2.EXAMPLE.COM which are reachable
          ; over the Internet

                       NS    NS1
                       NS    NS2

          ; Internet mail for EXAMPLE.COM is handled by the server
          ; MAIL.EXAMPLE.COM

                       MX    10 MAIL.EXAMPLE.COM.

          ; The public nameservers NS1.EXAMPLE.COM and NS2.EXAMPLE.COM

          NS1          A     192.0.2.25
          NS1          AAAA  2001:db8:e0::2a

          NS2          A     192.0.2.27
          NS2          AAAA  2001:db8:e0::2b

          ; MAIL.EXAMPLE.COM and WWW.EXAMPLE.COM are intended to be used
          ; from anywhere, not just by internal clients, so they are
          ; named in the global namespace

          MAIL         A     192.0.2.41
          MAIL         A     2001:db8:e0::f1

          WWW          A     192.0.2.58
          WWW          AAAA  2001:db8:e0::5e

          ; CORP.EXAMPLE.COM is our internal namespace. Delegate the
          ; corresponding zone to nowhere

          CORP         NS    .

6.2.  General Purpose Top-Level Domain for Internal Namespaces

   Suppose it has been decided that the top-level domain INTERNAL be
   reserved for use in private namespaces.  The root zone of the global
   DNS is signed using DNSSEC [RFC4033]; that is, DNSSEC-specific RRSets
   are published in the root zone that allow DNSSEC-aware resolvers to
   be sure with cryptographic certainty whether particular top-level
   domains exist in the public namespace.

   A delegation to nowhere for the INTERNAL top-level domain in the root
   zone of the global DNS namespace would provide an unambiguous signal
   to resolvers that INTERNAL does exist in other namespaces.  An
   insecure delegation to nowhere is appropriate in this example since
   there is no single trust anchor that could be used to provide a
   secure delegation to zones in multiple namespaces that have
   different, non-cooperating administrators.

           $ORIGIN .

           ; the INTERNAL top-level domain is delegated to nowhere, to
           ; facilitate its use in private namespaces

           INTERNAL  172800  IN  NS  .

7.  Updates to RFC 1035

   This document updates Section 3.3.11 of [RFC1035] as follows:

      NSDNAME MAY be specified as a single, zero-length label.  An NS
      RRSet that consists of a single NS resource record with empty
      NSDNAME is used to indicate that a zone cut exists without
      providing any authoritative nameservers for the child zone.  The
      purpose of such an RRSet is to confirm that the child zone exists,
      but in a different namespace from the parent (e.g. in a private
      namespace).

8.  Other Uses of the Empty Name in the DNS

   In [RFC7505] an MX resource record with an empty target (called
   EXCHANGE in [RFC1035]) is specified to mean that the corresponding
   domain name does not accept e-mail.  In effect, the empty field is
   used to indicate that there is no host available to use for e-mail
   delivery.

   In [RFC2782] an SRV 'Target of "." means that the service is
   decidedly not available at this domain.'

   [RFC9460], Section 2.5 notes that 'For AliasMode SVCB RRs, a
   TargetName of "." indicates that the service is not available or does
   not exist.'

   These uses of the empty name are conceptually consistent with the
   meaning defined in this document: that using an empty name is to be
   interpreted as the corresponding function not being available.

9.  Operational Considerations

   The empty name is not known to have been widely used as an NS target,
   although it has been used with other resource records, as described
   in Section 8.  It is a reasonable concern that if delegations to
   nowhere became prevalent, or if names related to such zone cuts were
   associated with significant traffic, some operational problem might
   result.  For example, DNS software that made incompatible assumptions
   about DNS responses might fail, or harmful traffic to root servers
   might result.

   Some experiments carried out by the authors to assess the likelihood
   of such problems are described in Appendix A.  The results of those
   experiments do not suggest that the widespread use of delegations to
   nowhere would lead to operational problems.

   Many organizations have a private namespace that is not mirrored on
   the outside, except, partially and temporarily, when deploying TXT
   records for ACME DNS-01 validation to obtain certificates for
   internal usage from one of the common WebPKI CAs.  Organizations with
   such a setup cannot use the delegation to nowhere.

10.  Security Considerations

   By explicitly signalling the existence of a private child zone, this
   mechanism prevents DNSSEC-aware resolvers from erroneously caching
   authenticated denial of existence (NSEC/NSEC3) records from the
   global namespace for private subdomains.  This allows a roaming,
   DNSSEC-aware resolver to maintain a consistent chain of trust
   regardless of its vantage point.  Consequently, this unambiguous
   configuration offers better security and operational stability than
   relying on split-horizon architectures without explicit parent-side
   signalling.

11.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.

   The example of the designated top-level domain INTERNAL being
   provisioned as a delegation of INTERNAL to nowhere from the root zone
   was intentionally chosen in order to make it clear that such a
   configuration is allowed, is consistent with this specification and
   facilitates the use of private namespaces named under such a top-
   level domain with less ambiguity than might otherwise occur.  This
   document does not provide any operational direction to the IANA,
   however.

12.  References

12.1.  Normative References

   [RFC1034]  Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - concepts and facilities",
              STD 13, RFC 1034, DOI 10.17487/RFC1034, November 1987,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc1034>.

   [RFC1035]  Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - implementation and
              specification", STD 13, RFC 1035, DOI 10.17487/RFC1035,
              November 1987, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc1035>.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119>.

   [RFC4033]  Arends, R., Austein, R., Larson, M., Massey, D., and S.
              Rose, "DNS Security Introduction and Requirements",
              RFC 4033, DOI 10.17487/RFC4033, March 2005,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc4033>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174>.

   [RFC9499]  Hoffman, P. and K. Fujiwara, "DNS Terminology", BCP 219,
              RFC 9499, DOI 10.17487/RFC9499, March 2024,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9499>.

12.2.  Informative References

   [Byrne1985]
              Byrne, D., "Road to Nowhere", from the album "Little
              Creatures", Sire Records, 3 June 1985.

   [Hardaker2026]
              Hardaker, W., "Analyzing .internal to .dot",
              https://ant.isi.edu/~hardaker/papers/2026-04-27-analyzing-
              dot-internal-to-dot.pdf, 27 April 2026.

   [IEPG-IETF125]
              "IEPG @ IETF 125 Meeting Recording",
              https://youtu.be/fGZj3SWi-OI?t=1772, n.d..

   [Powers2006]
              Powers, T., "Three Days to Never", William Morrow &
              Company, ISBN 978-0380976539, 8 August 2006.

   [RFC2782]  Gulbrandsen, A., Vixie, P., and L. Esibov, "A DNS RR for
              specifying the location of services (DNS SRV)", RFC 2782,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2782, February 2000,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2782>.

   [RFC6762]  Cheshire, S. and M. Krochmal, "Multicast DNS", RFC 6762,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC6762, February 2013,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6762>.

   [RFC7505]  Levine, J. and M. Delany, "A "Null MX" No Service Resource
              Record for Domains That Accept No Mail", RFC 7505,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC7505, June 2015,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7505>.

   [RFC9460]  Schwartz, B., Bishop, M., and E. Nygren, "Service Binding
              and Parameter Specification via the DNS (SVCB and HTTPS
              Resource Records)", RFC 9460, DOI 10.17487/RFC9460,
              November 2023, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9460>.

   [RFC9476]  Kumari, W. and P. Hoffman, "The .alt Special-Use Top-Level
              Domain", RFC 9476, DOI 10.17487/RFC9476, September 2023,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9476>.

Appendix A.  Experiments

   Please see [Hardaker2026] for some real world testing of the use of
   delegations to nowhere, and the IEPG recording of the discussion:
   [IEPG-IETF125].

Acknowledgments

   The phrase "delegation to nowhere" was inspired by the misremebered
   title of a novel by Tim Powers entitled "Two Days to Nowhere", in
   which characters deal with ambiguous realities by way of supernatural
   sensitivity, time travel and alcohol.  This seemed like a good
   metaphor for the problem of provisioning overlapping namespaces in
   the DNS.

   Unfortunately, it appears that Tim Powers wrote no such book,
   although he did publish the similarly-named novel "Three Days to
   Never" [Powers2006] which is perhaps what I was thinking of.  And
   it's certainly true that much of his writing features ambiguity, the
   supernatural and excessive drinking.  Memory is a tricky thing.

   The song "Road to Nowhere" [Byrne1985] from the 1985 Talking Heads
   album "Little Creatures" would perhaps have been a better inspiration
   for the terminology.  It's a shame that's not what happened.

   The authors stand ready to acknowledge all contributions from their
   friends and colleagues.  These include, but are not limited to, the
   following people: Mark Andrews, Ray Bellis, Steve Crocker, Peter van
   Dijk, Ross Gibson, Paul Hoffman, Geoff Huston, Philip Homburg,
   Eberhard Lisse, Ted Lemon, Andrew McConachie, Scott Morizot, Benno
   Overeinder, Libor Peltan, Petr Špaček, Michael Richardson, Michael De
   Roover, Ondřej Surý, and Peter Thomassen.  At least one of the
   authors has a staggeringly bad memory for names, faces, and life in
   general, so if you contributed and your name is not listed here,
   please accept our apologies and let us know so we can correct the
   oversight.

Authors' Addresses

   Joe Abley
   Cloudflare
   Email: jabley@cloudflare.com


   Wes Hardaker
   USC/ISI
   Email: ietf@hardakers.net


   Warren Kumari
   Google, Inc.
   Email: warren@kumari.net
